docs: initial content for Android Marshalling (#32)
NativeScript/docs: content/guide/android-marshalling.md

---
title: Android Marshalling
---

> This article looks at how NativeScript handles the conversion between JavaScript data types and  Java/Kotlin data types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NativeScript seamlessly handles data type conversion between JavaScript and Java/Kotlin, utilizing type inference and dedicated wrappers, ensuring smooth integration and type safety in cross-platform development.
```

## String Conversion
### Converting JavaScript String to Java string types

JavaScript [String](http://www.w3schools.com/jsref/jsref_obj_string.asp) maps to [java.lang.String](http://developer.android.com/reference/java/lang/String.html):

```js
var context = ...;
var button = new android.widget.Button(context);
var text = "My Button"; 
button.setText(text); 
```
`button.setText(text)` - `text` is converted to `java.lang.String`

### Converting JavaScript String to Kotlin string types

JavaScript [String](http://www.w3schools.com/jsref/jsref_obj_string.asp) maps to [kotlin.String](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin/-string/index.html):

```js

> var kotlinClass = new com.example.KotlinClassWithStringProperty()

Reviewer: 'let' or 'const' in place of 'var'?  Who still uses var?

> var kotlinClass = new com.example.KotlinClassWithStringProperty()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
const kotlinClass = new com.example.KotlinClassWithStringProperty()
```

```js 
var context = ...
var button = new android.widget.Button(context);
var enabled = button.isEnabled(); 
```

`isEnabled()` - returns `primitive boolean`, converted to JS `Boolean`

### Converting from Kotlin boolean to JavaScript boolean

Kotlin's boolean type [kotlin.Boolean](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin/-boolean/index.html) is mapped to JavaScript [Boolean](http://www.w3schools.com/jsref/jsref_obj_boolean.asp):

```kotlin
package com.example

class KotlinClassWithBooleanProperty {
  val booleanProperty: Boolean = false
}
```

```js
var kotlinClass = new com.example.KotlinClassWithBooleanProperty()
var enabled = kotlinClass.getBooleanProperty() // returns Kotlin Boolean, converted to JS Boolean
```

`getBooleanProperty()` - returns `Kotlin Boolean`, converted to JS `Boolean`.

## Numeric data types

### Converting JavaScript Number to Java/Kotlin numeric types

> Java and Koltin have several primitive numeric types while JavaScript has the `Number` type only. Additionally, unlike JavaScript, Java and Kotlin  support [Method Overloading](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Function_overloading), which makes the numeric conversion more complex.

Reviewer: Typo found, should be Kotlin, not Koltin.

JS now has a new number type of BigInt

> Java and Koltin have several primitive numeric types while JavaScript has the `Number` type only. Additionally, unlike JavaScript, Java and Kotlin  support [Method Overloading](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Function_overloading), which makes the numeric conversion more complex.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Java and Kotlin have several primitive numeric types while JavaScript has the `Number` type only. Additionally, unlike JavaScript, Java and Kotlin  support [Method Overloading](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Function_overloading), which makes the numeric conversion more complex.
```

    }

    public void myMethod(float value){
    }

    public void myMethod(double value){
    }
}
```

```kotlin
class MyObject : Any() {
    fun myMethod(value: Byte) {}

    fun myMethod(value: Short) {}

    fun myMethod(value: Int) {}

    fun myMethod(value: Long) {}

    fun myMethod(value: Float) {}

    fun myMethod(value: Double) {}
}
```

The following logic applies when calling `myMethod` on a `myObject` instance from JavaScript:

```js
var myObject = new MyObject()
```
#### Implicit conversion

- **integer** conversion:

When you call 

```js
myObject.myMethod(10) 
```

the runtime implicitly converts the JavaScript `10(Number)` to Java/Kotlin `Int` and then calls the `myMethod(Int)` method.

::: warning Note
If there is no myMethod(Int) implementation, the Android runtime will try to choose the best possible overload with least conversion loss. If no such method is found an exception will be raised.
:::

- **floating-point** conversion:

```js
myObject.myMethod(10.5) // myMethod(Double) will be called.
```
The JavaScript `10.5` `Number` gets converted to Java/Kotlin `double` and then myMethod(ouble) gets called.

::: warning Note

> If there is no myMethod(double) implementation, the Runtime will try to choose the best possible overload with least conversion loss. If no such method is found an exception will be raised.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a scenario where no myMethod(double) implementation exists, the Runtime will attempt to select the most suitable possible overload, with the least amount of conversion loss.  If no such method is found an exception thrown.
```

:::

#### Explicit conversion

To explicitly convert from a JavaScript `Number` to Java/Kotlin numeric data types, and call a specific method overload, NativeScript provides the following functions in the global scope: 

- `byte(number)` → (`Java primitive byte` | `Kotlin Byte` ) <br>

>     \- The number value will be truncated and only its first byte of the whole part will be used.

Reviewer: Does it get truncated or rounded to one decimal place?

<!-- TODO: add  Accessing APIs link-->

<!-- tab: Java to JS  -->
```js
var directory = new java.io.File('path/to/myDir')
var files = directory.listFiles() // files is a special object as described above
var singleFile = files[0] // the indexed getter callback is triggered and a proxy object over the java.io.File is returned
```

```kotlin
package com.example

class KotlinClassWithStringArrayProperty {
  val stringArrayProperty: Array<String> = arrayOf("element1", "element2", "element3")
}
```
<!--tab: Kt to JS  -->
```js
var kotlinClass = new com.example.KotlinClassWithStringArrayProperty()
var kotlinArray = kotlinClass.getStringArrayProperty() // kotlinArray is a special object as described above
var firstStringElement = kotlinArray[0] // the indexed getter callback is triggered and the kotlin.String is returned as a JS string
```

::: warning Note
A Java/Kotlin Array is intentionally not converted to a JavaScript [Array](http://www.w3schools.com/jsref/jsref_obj_array.asp) for the sake of performance, especially when it comes to large arrays.
:::

##### Array of Objects

> Occasionally you have to create Java/Kotlin arrays from JavaScript. For this scenario we added method `create` to built-in JavaScript [`Array` object](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array). Here are some examples how to use `Array.create` method:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In scenarios where the creation of Java/Kotlin arrays from JavaScript is mandatory.  In the given scenario, we have extended the built-in JavaScript Array object by adding a custom method named create. By doing so, we have augmented the default functionality of the Array object with our own implementation to cater to specific requirements in built-in JavaScript [`Array` object](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Array). Here are some examples how to use `Array.create` method:
```

```js
// the following statement is equivalent to byte[] byteArr = new byte[10];
var byteArr = Array.create('byte', 10)

// the following statement is equivalent to String[] stringArr = new String[10];
var stringArr = Array.create(java.lang.String, 10)
```

Here is the full specification for `Array.create` method

```js
Array.create(elementClassName, length)
```

```js
Array.create(javaClassCtorFunction, length)
```

> The first signature accepts `string` for `elementClassName`. This option is useful when you have to create Java array of primitive types (e.g. `char`, `boolean`, `byte`, `short`, `int`, `long`, `float` and `double`). It is also useful when you have to create Java jagged arrays. For this scenario `elementClassName` must be the standard JNI class notation. Here are some examples:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first signature accepts a `string` type  for an `elementClassName`.  This option becomes beneficial when the creation of a Java array of primitive types (e.g. `char`, `boolean`, `byte`, `short`, `int`, `long`, `float` and `double`) is required.  This also applicable when the creation of Java jagged arrays is needed.  For this scenario `elementClassName` must be the standard JNI class notation. Here are some examples:
```

```js
// equivalent to int[][] jaggedIntArray2 = new int[10][];
var jaggedIntArray2 = Array.create('[I', 10)

// equivalent to boolean[][][] jaggedBooleanArray3 = new boolean[10][][];
var jaggedBooleanArray3 = Array.create('[[Z', 10)

// equivalent to Object[][][][] jaggedObjectArray4 = new Object[10][][][];
var jaggedObjectArray4 = Array.create('[[[Ljava.lang.Object;', 10)
```

> The second signature uses `javaClassCtorFunction` which must the JavaScript constructor function for a given Java type. Here are some examples:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second signature requires you to provide the `javaClassCtorFunction`, which must be the JavaScript constructor function representing the desired Java type.  Here are some examples:
```

```js
// equivalent to String[] stringArr = new String[10];
var stringArr = Array.create(java.lang.String, 10)

// equivalent to Object[] objectArr = new Object[10];
var objectArr = Array.create(java.lang.Object, 10)
```

#### Array of Primitive Types

> The automatic marshalling works only for cases with arrays of objects. In cases where you have a method that takes an array of primitive types, you need to convert it as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When dealing with arrays of primitive types, automatic marshalling is not supported. To pass them as arguments to a method, you'll need to use wrapper classes (e.g., Integer, Double) to convert the primitives into objects, allowing for automatic marshalling.
```

elements[1] = new java.lang.Integer(2)
elements[2] = new java.lang.Integer(3)
arr[0] = elements

SomeObject.myMethod(arr) // assuming the method is accepting a two-dimensional array of primitive types
```

```kotlin
interface Printer {
    fun print(content: String)
    fun print(content: String, offset: Int)
}

interface Copier {
    fun copy(content: String): String
}

interface Writer {
    fun write(arr: Array<Any>)
    fun writeLine(arr: Array<Any>)
}
```

Implementing the interfaces:

```java
public class MyVersatileCopywriter implements Printer, Copier, Writer {
    public void print(String content) { ... }

    public void print(String content, int offset) { ... }

    public String copy(String content) { ... }

    public void write(Object[] arr) { ... }

    public void writeLine(Object[] arr) { ... }
}
```

```kotlin
class MyVersatileCopywriter: Printer, Copier, Writer{

    override fun print(content: String) { ... }

    override fun print(content: String, offset: Int) { ... }

    override fun copy(content: String): String { ... }

    override fun write(arr: Array<Any>) { ... }

    override fun writeLine(arr: Array<Any>) { ... }
}
```
<!-- TODO: fix links -->

> The same result can be achieved in NativeScript by extending any valid object that inherits [Java Object](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/lang/Object.html).

Reviewer: The link works fine.

> <!-- TODO: fix links -->

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

class MyVersatileCopyWriter extends java.lang.Object { 
    constructor() {
        super();
        return global.__native(this);
    }

    print() { ... }
    copy() { ... }
    write() { ... }
    writeLine() { ... }
}
```

:::warning
- Implementing two interfaces with the same method signature will generate just 1 method. It is the implementor's responsibility to define how the method will behave for both interfaces

- Implementing two interfaces with the same _method name_, _parameter number_, but **different return type** (`void a()` vs `boolean a()`) will result in a compilation error.
:::

:::warning Note
Java/Kotlin method overloads are handled by the developer by explicitly checking the arguments count of the invoked function
:::

```ts
class MyVersatileCopyWriter extends ... {
    constructor() {
        super();
        return global.__native(this);
    }
    ...
    print() {
        let content = "";
        let offset = 0;

        if (arguments.length == 2) {
            offset = arguments[1];
        }

        content = arguments[0];

        // do stuff
    }
    ...
}
```
:::tip Note

> In addition to implementing interface methods, you can override methods of the extended class, and also declare your own methods that the new class should have.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In OOP, when a class extends another class aka inheritance, the new class not only gains access to the interface methods it must implement, but also has the ability to override methods from the extended class. Moreover, it can introduce new methods specific to the new class's functionality. This enables the new class to extend and enhance the behaviour of its parent class while providing additional functionality of its own.
```

:::

## Java nested types in NativeScript

```java
public class Outer {
    public class Inner {
      // inner and nested class
    }

    public static class Nested {
      // nested but not inner class
    }
}
```
```java
//Instantiate nested types
Outer outer = new Outer();
Outer.Inner inner1 = outer.new Inner();

Outer.Inner inner2 = new Outer().new Inner();

Outer.Nested nested = new Outer.Nested()
```
```ts
var outer = new Outer();

var inner1 = new outer.Inner();     

var inner2 = new new Outer().Inner();

var nested =  new Outer.Nested();

````
## Kotlin Types

> All Kotlin types are projected to JavaScript using the Package and Class proxies as described in  <!-- TODO: add link [Accessing APIs](#accessing-apis)-->

Reviewer: TODO here

```

```js
var kotlinClass = new com.example.KotlinClassWithStringProperty()

var propertyValue = kotlinClass.getStringPropert()
kotlinClass.setStringProperty('example')

propertyValue = kotlinClass.stringProperty
kotlinClass.stringProperty = 'second example'
```

## Accessing Kotlin package-level functions

In order to use a Kotlin [package-level function](https://kotlinlang.org/docs/reference/java-to-kotlin-interop.html#package-level-functions), the class where it's defined should be known. Let's take a look at an example:

```kotlin
package com.example

fun getRandomNumber() = 42
```

```js
var randomNumber = com.example.FunctionsKt.getRandomNumber()
```

In the example above, the class `FunctionsKt` is autogenerated by the Kotlin compiler and its name is based on the name of the file where the functions are defined. Kotlin supports annotating a file to have a user provided name and this simplifies using package-level functions:

```js
var randomNumber = com.example.UtilityFunctions.getRandomNumber()
```

```kotlin
@file:JvmName("UtilityFunctions")
package com.example

fun getRandomNumber() = 42
```

## Accessing Kotlin extension functions

>  In order to use an extension function, the class where it's defined should be known. Also, when invoking it, the first parameter should be an instance of the type for which the function is defined. Let's take a look at an example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to use an extension function, the class where it's defined is required to be known.  Also, when invoking this function, the first parameter should be an instance of the type for which the function is defined.  Let's take a look at an example:
```

```kotlin
package com.example

import java.util.ArrayList

fun ArrayList<String>.switchPlaces(firstElementIndex: Int, secondElementIndex: Int) {
  val temp = this[firstElementIndex]
  this[firstElementIndex] = this[secondElementIndex]
  this[secondElementIndex] = temp
}
```
```js
var arrayList = new java.util.ArrayList()
arrayList.add('firstElement')
arrayList.add('secondElement')
com.example.Extensions.switchPlaces(arrayList, 0, 1)
```

> In the example above, the class `ExtensionsKt` is autogenerated by the Kotlin compiler and its name is based on the name of the file where the functions are defined. Kotlin supports annotating a file to have a user provided name and this simplifies using package-level functions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example above, the class `ExtensionsKt` is autogenerated by the Kotlin compiler and its name is derived on the name of the file where the functions are defined.  Kotlin supports annotating a file to have a user provided name, simplifying using package-level functions:
```
